Introduces a new LogicalType: FILE (#585)
apache/parquet-format: LogicalTypes.md

The sort order used for `GEOGRAPHY` is undefined. When writing data, no min/max
statistics should be saved for this type and if such non-compliant statistics
are found during reading, they must be ignored.

### FILE

`FILE` annotates a group that represents a reference to a range of bytes, which may

> be stored inline in the value, elsewhere within this file, or in an external file. It

Reviewer: nit: "this file" is used throughout this section, and I know it means "in the same file as the other Parquet data", but I find the use of "this" a bit awkward. Perhaps instead say "the current file". 🤷

is intended for use cases such as storing file inventories, manifests, and unstructured
data references (e.g., images or audio files stored in object storage).

> The annotated group may contain the following fields, identified by name. Field IDs

Reviewer: Using "may" means some of the fields may be omitted? For instance, if all files are inlined, the group could be
```
optional group inline_file (FILE) {
  optional binary content_type (STRING);
  optional binary checksum (STRING);
  optional binary inline;
}
```
Solely external files could be
```
optional group external_file (FILE) {
  optional binary path (STRING);
  optional binary content_type (STRING);
}
```

If so, I think there should be more examples given to make this clear.

> may also be used for projection. All fields are optional:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
may also be used for projection. All fields have a field repetition type of `OPTIONAL`:
```

> | Field          | Type       | Required |

Reviewer: I don't think the "Required" column adds anything here.

|----------------|------------|----------|
| `path`         | STRING     | No       |
| `offset`       | INT64      | No       |
| `size`         | INT64      | No       |
| `content_type` | STRING     | No       |
| `checksum`     | STRING     | No       |
| `inline`       | BYTE_ARRAY | No       |

A value resolves to bytes determined by `inline` / `path` / `offset` / `size`;
`content_type` and `checksum` are metadata describing whatever is resolved.

#### Fields

> 

Reviewer: I think we should use a consistent term for the presence of the fields in this section. Perhaps
```
For the descriptions below, the term "set" means the field is present in the
`FILE` group, and the value of the field is non-null (and not empty in the case
of strings). Saying a field is "not set" means either the field is not present
in the group, or is null or empty.
```

##### path

An opaque path string to an external file (e.g., `s3://bucket/file.jpg`). No special

> encoding (e.g., URI encoding) is applied on top of the user provided data. If `path` is absent,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
encoding (e.g., URI encoding) is applied on top of the user provided data. If `path` is not set,
```

the value refers to this file (a self-reference).

##### offset

A byte offset indicating the start of the byte range within the referenced data.
If not provided, readers must treat the value as 0.

> If provided and non-zero, readers must seek to this offset to retrieve the referenced data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If not set, readers must treat the value as 0.
If set and non-zero, readers must seek to this offset to retrieve the referenced data.
```

##### size

The byte length of the referenced data. Must be zero or a positive integer if provided.

> A value of 0 indicates empty referenced data. If not provided, the range runs to the end

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The byte length of the referenced data. Must be zero or a positive integer if set.
A value of 0 indicates empty referenced data. If not set, the range runs to the end
```

> A value of 0 indicates empty referenced data. If not provided, the range runs to the end

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The byte length of the referenced data. Must be zero or a positive integer if provided. It must be set if `path` or `offset` are set.
```

Reviewer: Here too, I think "if `path` is not set or `offset` is set"

of the referenced data.

##### content_type

The media type (MIME type) of the resolved bytes (e.g., `image/png`).

##### checksum

A self-describing integrity token for the resolved bytes, of the form
`<algorithm>:base64(<digest bytes>)`. It generalizes the storage-system eTag. The
recognized algorithms are:

| Algorithm | Notes                                                          |
|-----------|----------------------------------------------------------------|
| `ETAG`    | the object-store eTag — equality-only, not recomputable        |
| `MD5`     | the usual S3/HTTP eTag and Content-MD5                         |
| `CRC32`   | Parquet's page-checksum algorithm (gzip/zlib)                 |
| `CRC32C`  | common in object stores, hardware-accelerated                  |
| `SHA-256` | e.g. S3 additional checksums                                  |

`checksum` applies to the resolved bytes, except for `ETAG`, which is the
object-store eTag for the whole file referenced by `path`.

##### inline

The referenced bytes stored inline in the value. If `inline` is set, it supplies the

> bytes and any locator fields (`path`, `offset`, `size`) that are present are provenance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
bytes and any locator fields (`path`, `offset`, `size`) that are set are provenance
```

only.

#### Resolution

A value resolves to bytes based on which of `inline`, `path`, `offset`, and `size` are
set:

| `inline` | `path` | `offset` | `size` | Resolves to                                  |
|----------|--------|----------|--------|----------------------------------------------|
| set      | –      | –        | –      | the inline bytes                             |

> | –        | set    | –        | –      | whole external file at `path`                |

Reviewer 2: This would be invalid with the new requirements for `size`.

> | –        | set    | set      | –      | external `path`, `[offset, EOF)`             |

Reviewer 2: This would be invalid with the new requirements for `size`.

| –        | set    | –        | set    | external `path`, `[0, size)`                 |
| –        | set    | set      | set    | external `path`, `[offset, offset + size)`   |

> | –        | –      | set      | –      | this file, `[offset, EOF)` (self-reference)  |

Reviewer 2: This would be invalid with the new requirements for `size`.

| –        | –      | –        | set    | this file, `[0, size)` (self-reference)      |
| –        | –      | set      | set    | this file, `[offset, offset + size)` (self-reference) |
| –        | –      | –        | –      | nothing — invalid                            |

A self-reference typically points within the same Parquet file using `offset` and
`size`; the bytes are written between column chunks and are not otherwise referenced by

> the footer. A self-reference is the absence of `path`, never an absolute path back to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the footer. A self-reference is when `path` is not set, never an absolute path back to
```

the current file, so a file containing self-references is renamed or relocated as a
single unit.

The referenced bytes are compressed with the same `CompressionCodec` as the one

> specified for the `inline` column.

Reviewer: Is this only true for inline files?

> specified for the `inline` column.

Reviewer 2: Let's make this clearer.

```suggestion
The bytes referenced by a self-reference are compressed with the same `CompressionCodec` as the one specified for the `inline` column.
```

Reviewer 3: Should we point out `CompressionCodec` can differ per page?

Author: @alkis thoughts? Is there a reason that the data needs to be compressed additionally? Most formats may be optimal anyway.

Reviewer 2: The reason is because we are making the assumption that the type of data stored in the file column is homogeneous. I argue that's a good assumption. If this column contains text, there is little reason to assume it will be a string when small and an image when large. Ergo if the writer chose to compress the column it should compress the self-referenced packed blobs too.

I wanted to make all packed references compressed as well but there was some pushback for that with the argument that external may be referenced by different parquet files and it may choose its own compression scheme (or none at all). I can see arguments both ways - it is a tradeoff.

Making all packed references inherit the CompressionCodec makes the spec more consistent.
Making only self-references inherit the CompressionCodec is friendlier to shared external references.

We pick one of the two, it is a tradeoff.

Reviewer 4: > Should we point out CompressionCodec can differ per page?

Author: I removed this after more discussion. Most multimodal data is already compressed, e.g. jpeg, png, video formats, ... Inline data will already be compressed, the self-referenced data doesn't need to be compressed as well. Other formats don't do any additional compression

#### Validation

* A value must resolve to some referenced data. If none of `inline`, `path`, `offset`, or
  `size` is set, the value does not resolve and is invalid; use column nullability to
  represent a null value.
* If `inline` is set, it supplies the bytes; producers may instead treat `inline` and the
  locator fields as mutually exclusive.
* Field names within a `FILE`-annotated group must not be renamed.

> * Additional metadata about the file (e.g., modification timestamp) should

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Additional metadata about the file (e.g., modification timestamp) must
```

| `inline`       | BYTE_ARRAY |

A value resolves to bytes determined by `inline` / `path` / `offset` / `size`;
`content_type` and `checksum` are metadata describing whatever is resolved.

#### Fields

For the descriptions below, a field is *set* when it is present in the `FILE` group
and its value is non-null (and, for string fields, non-empty). A field is *not set*
when it is absent from the group, or is present but null or empty.

##### path

An opaque path string to an external file (e.g., `s3://bucket/file.jpg`). No special
encoding (e.g., URI encoding) is applied on top of the user-provided data. If `path` is
not set, the value refers to the current file (a self-reference).

##### offset

A byte offset indicating the start of the byte range within the referenced data.
If not set, readers must treat the value as 0.
If set and non-zero, readers must seek to this offset to retrieve the referenced data.

##### size

The byte length of the referenced data. Must be zero or a positive integer if set; a
value of 0 indicates empty referenced data. `size` must be set whenever `offset` is set
or `path` is not set. It may be omitted only for a whole-file external reference (`path`

> set, `offset` not set), in which case the range runs to the end of the referenced file.

Reviewer 2: This need the equivalent update in the comment in the thrift udl.

##### content_type

The media type (MIME type) of the resolved bytes (e.g., `image/png`).

##### checksum

A self-describing integrity token for the resolved bytes, of the form

> `<algorithm>:base64(<digest bytes>)`. It generalizes the storage-system eTag. The

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`<algorithm>:base64(<digest bytes>)`. The
```
nit: not sure if this is relevant given the table below.

> recognized algorithms are:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
recognized algorithms are (readers should ignore unknown algorithms):
```

| Algorithm | Notes                                                          |
|-----------|----------------------------------------------------------------|
| `ETAG`    | the object-store eTag — equality-only, not recomputable        |
| `MD5`     | the usual S3/HTTP eTag and Content-MD5                         |
| `CRC32`   | Parquet's page-checksum algorithm (gzip/zlib)                 |
| `CRC32C`  | common in object stores, hardware-accelerated                  |

> | `SHA-256` | e.g. S3 additional checksums                                  |

Reviewer 2: nit: align the rightmost `|`

`checksum` applies to the resolved bytes, except for `ETAG`, which is the
object-store eTag for the whole file referenced by `path`.

##### inline

The referenced bytes stored inline in the value. If `inline` is set, it supplies the
bytes and any locator fields (`path`, `offset`, `size`) that are set are provenance
only.

#### Resolution

A value resolves to bytes based on which of `inline`, `path`, `offset`, and `size` are
set:

> | `inline` | `path` | `offset` | `size` | Resolves to                                           |

Reviewer 2: Let's update this table with the updated table to the design doc:

<img width="646" height="437" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/778fdbd2-3d75-4918-b754-69b401a5f1fd" />

|----------|--------|----------|--------|-------------------------------------------------------|
| set      | –      | –        | –      | the inline bytes                                      |
| –        | set    | –        | –      | whole external file at `path`                         |
| –        | set    | –        | set    | external `path`, `[0, size)`                          |
| –        | set    | set      | set    | external `path`, `[offset, offset + size)`            |

> | –        | –      | –        | set    | current file, `[0, size)` (self-reference)            |

Reviewer 4: Bytes 0-3 of an inline file should always be `PAR1` or the relevant magic number of the parquet file.

| –        | –      | set      | set    | current file, `[offset, offset + size)` (self-reference) |
| –        | –      | –        | –      | nothing — invalid                                     |

`size` must be set whenever `offset` is set or `path` is not set, so a self-reference
and any offset-based read always carry an explicit `size`. It may be omitted only for a

> whole-file external reference, where the range runs to the end of the referenced file.

Reviewer 2: Update this to match.

A self-reference typically points within the same Parquet file using `offset` and
`size`; the bytes are written between column chunks and are not otherwise referenced by
the footer. A self-reference is when `path` is not set, never an absolute path back to
the current file, so a file containing self-references is renamed or relocated as a
single unit.

The bytes referenced by a self-reference are compressed with the same `CompressionCodec`
as the one specified for the `inline` column.

#### Validation

* A value must resolve to some referenced data. If none of `inline`, `path`, `offset`, or
  `size` is set, the value does not resolve and is invalid; use column nullability to
  represent a null value.
* `size` must be set whenever `offset` is set or `path` is not set. A value that sets

>   `offset` without `size`, or is a self-reference (no `path`) without `size`, is invalid.

Reviewer 2: Also needs update.

|----------------|------------|
| `path`         | STRING     |
| `offset`       | INT64      |
| `size`         | INT64      |
| `content_type` | STRING     |
| `checksum`     | STRING     |
| `inline`       | BYTE_ARRAY |

A value resolves to bytes determined by `inline` / `path` / `offset` / `size`;
`content_type` and `checksum` are metadata describing whatever is resolved.

#### Fields

For the descriptions below, a field is *set* when it is present in the `FILE` group
and its value is non-null (and, for string fields, non-empty). A field is *not set*
when it is absent from the group, or is present but null or empty.

##### path

An opaque path string to an external file (e.g., `s3://bucket/file.jpg`). No special
encoding (e.g., URI encoding) is applied on top of the user-provided data. If `path` is
not set, the value refers to the current file (a self-reference).

##### offset

A byte offset indicating the start of the byte range within the referenced data.
If not set, readers must treat the value as 0.
If set and non-zero, readers must seek to this offset to retrieve the referenced data.
`offset` must be set for a self-reference (`path` not set); it is optional for an

> external reference (`path` set).

Reviewer 3: Perhaps worth specifying?
```suggestion
external reference (`path` set). `offset must not be < 0.
```

| `MD5`     | the usual S3/HTTP eTag and Content-MD5                          |
| `CRC32`   | Parquet's page-checksum algorithm (gzip/zlib)                   |
| `CRC32C`  | common in object stores, hardware-accelerated                   |
| `SHA-256` | e.g. S3 additional checksums                                    |

`checksum` applies to the resolved bytes, except for `ETAG`, which is the
object-store eTag for the whole file referenced by `path`.

##### inline

The referenced bytes stored inline in the value. If `inline` is set, it supplies the
bytes and any locator fields (`path`, `offset`, `size`) that are set are provenance
only.

#### Resolution

A value resolves to bytes based on which of `inline`, `path`, `offset`, and `size` are
set:

| `inline` | `path` | `offset` | `size` | Resolves to                                           |
|----------|--------|----------|--------|-------------------------------------------------------|
| set      | –      | –        | –      | the inline bytes                                      |
| –        | set    | –        | –      | whole external file at `path`                         |

> | –        | set    | set      | -      | external `path`, `[offset, EOF)`                      |

Reviewer 3: As per text below ("`size` must be set whenever `offset` is set, so any offset-based read always carries an explicit `size`") this should be invalid?
```suggestion
| –        | set    | set      | -      | external `path`, invalid                              |
```

Author: good catch, thank you.

is intended for use cases such as storing file inventories, manifests, and unstructured
data references (e.g., images or audio files stored in object storage).

The annotated group may contain the following fields, identified by name case sensitively,
not by field order. Field IDs, if they exist, may also be used for projection. Every field
is optional both in the schema and in the data: a writer may omit any field from the group
definition, and any field that is present has a field repetition type of `OPTIONAL`.
A group need only define the fields it uses (for example, an inline-only group may define
just `inline`, and an external reference may define just `path`).

| Field          | Type       |
|----------------|------------|
| `path`         | STRING     |
| `offset`       | INT64      |
| `size`         | INT64      |
| `content_type` | STRING     |
| `checksum`     | STRING     |
| `inline`       | BYTE_ARRAY |

A value resolves to bytes determined by `inline` / `path` / `offset` / `size`;
`content_type` and `checksum` are metadata describing whatever is resolved.

#### Fields

For the descriptions below, a field is *set* when it is present in the `FILE` group

> and its value is non-null (and, for string fields, non-empty). A field is *not set*

Reviewer 5: Nit: we should be clear that implementations are not expected to treat empty strings as null.

when it is absent from the group, or is present but null or empty.

##### path

A URI-reference as defined by RFC 3986, encoded as a Parquet STRING (e.g., `s3://bucket/file.jpg`).

> The URI may be absolute or relative. No additional encoding (e.g., URI encoding) is applied on top

Reviewer 6: Could you elaborate when it could be `relative` and any restriction on using a relative path?

Author: I don't think we should define how relative should be treated here. A table format may decide that it is relative to the parquet file itself or relative to the base path of a table. We're just saying that both forms (absolute and relative) are okay

> of the user-provided data. If `path` is not set, the value refers to the current file

Reviewer 7: A stupid issue: not set means it's NULL, and when not null, generally it should be non-empty RFC 3986 value?

Author: yep!

(a self-reference).

##### offset

A byte offset indicating the start of the byte range within the referenced data.
If not set, readers must treat the value as 0.
If set and non-zero, readers must seek to this offset to retrieve the referenced data.
`offset` must be set for a self-reference (`path` not set); it is optional for an
external reference (`path` set). `offset` must not be < 0.

##### size

The byte length of the referenced data. Must be zero or a positive integer if set; a
value of 0 indicates empty referenced data. `size` must be set whenever `offset` is set.
It may be omitted only for a whole-file external reference (`path` set, `offset` not set),
in which case the range runs to the end of the referenced file. Because a self-reference
always sets `offset`, it always sets `size` as well.

##### content_type

> The media type (MIME type) of the resolved bytes (e.g., `image/png`).

Reviewer 5: Minor: would be nice to have a reference like the URI reference. I thought that we also wanted to have an assumed MIME type, `application/octet-stream`? I'm fine if it isn't there, but I remember it coming up.

##### checksum

A self-describing integrity token for the resolved bytes, of the form
`<algorithm>:base64(<digest bytes>)`. Readers should ignore unknown 
algorithms. The recognized algorithms are:

| Algorithm | Notes                                                           |
|-----------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
| `ETAG`    | the object-store eTag — equality-only, not recomputable         |
| `MD5`     | the usual S3/HTTP eTag and Content-MD5                          |
| `CRC32`   | Parquet's page-checksum algorithm (gzip/zlib)                   |
| `CRC32C`  | common in object stores, hardware-accelerated                   |

> | `SHA-256` | e.g. S3 additional checksums                                    |

Reviewer 8: nit: What does the notes mean here? Shouldn't we just link to algorithm definitions like RFC 6234 or whatnot?

Author: Added RFCs

`checksum` applies to the resolved bytes, except for `ETAG`, which is the

> object-store eTag for the whole file referenced by `path`.

Reviewer 5: An example or a few examples would help here because of the use of base64 in the first paragraph.

Are we really going to use base64 for formats that are normally hexadecimal like etags?

Reviewer 2: Good point @rdblue. Perhaps we can switch to hex if it is more familiar?

Reviewer 5: I think I would just add this to the table and use whatever is normal for the use case. I think most of these use hex. What was the rationale for base64?

Author: base64 seems to be shorter in terms of length, but hex does seem to be more standard for these. The hex length for sha-256 is 64 characters whereas base64 is 44 characters. Do we care about space usage here?

Reviewer 5: If we cared about length, why would we use binary?

I think if we're using a string representation, then we should go with the most human-friendly form, which is the hex string most people are used to. That is also good if you don't only have machine validation of the checksum or etag.

bytes and any locator fields (`path`, `offset`, `size`) that are set are provenance
only.

#### Resolution

A value resolves to bytes based on which of `inline`, `path`, `offset`, and `size` are
set:

| `inline` | `path` | `offset` | `size` | Resolves to                                           |
|----------|--------|----------|--------|-------------------------------------------------------|
| set      | –      | –        | –      | the inline bytes                                      |
| –        | set    | –        | –      | whole external file at `path`                         |
| –        | set    | set      | -      | invalid                                               |
| –        | set    | –        | set    | external `path`, `[0, size)`                          |
| –        | set    | set      | set    | external `path`, `[offset, offset + size)`            |
| –        | -      | set      | -      | invalid                                               |
| –        | -      | -        | set    | invalid                                               |
| –        | –      | set      | set    | this file, `[offset, offset + size)` (self-reference) |

> | –        | –      | –        | –      | nothing — invalid                                     |

Reviewer 6: Why this is invalid? Shouldn't it be unset, namely no file is associated with this row?

Reviewer 5: Yes, I think the intent is that if you make the struct non-null, then at least one of the values that tracks content must be used.

`size` must be set whenever `offset` is set, so any offset-based read always carries an
explicit `size`. A self-reference (`path` not set) must set `offset`, and therefore also
`size`. `size` may be omitted only for a whole-file external reference, where the range
runs to the end of the referenced file.

A self-reference points within the same Parquet file using `offset` and `size` (both

> required); the bytes are written between column chunks and are not otherwise referenced by

Reviewer 5: I don't think that we should specify where bytes must be written. Other restrictions apply, but it would be reasonable to place these just before the indexes and footer as well.

Reviewer 2: Yes bytes can be placed anywhere. For all we care they could be in hidden thrift extensions in page headers, reader should be able to fetch them with offset+size.

> the footer. A self-reference is when `path` is not set, never an absolute path back to

Reviewer 5: The phrase "never an absolute path back to the current file" sounds like you're saying "path must not be an absolute reference to the current file and must instead be unset". If that's true, I'd use a more clear phrasing to instruct people to replace self-references with `null`.

the current file, so a file containing self-references is renamed or relocated as a
single unit.

> The bytes referenced by a self-reference are compressed with the same `CompressionCodec`

Reviewer 6: The does not look right. Same column can have different codecs across different row groups. V2 pages can even decide whether to compress individually. Even if all row groups of the same column use the same codec, how can we tell whether self-referenced data is compressed or not?

Author: reworded to 

```
The bytes referenced by a self-reference use the `CompressionCodec`
defined by the `inline` column chunk's `ColumnMetadata`.
```

is that better @wgtmac ?

Reviewer 6: I may have missed the relevant discussion on this so please correct me if I was wrong.

`CompressionCodec` defined by a `ColumnMetadata` is to compress all data pages of that column chunk in that specific row group. The description here means that we enforce all inline blocks referenced by this FILE column to always use the same `CompressionCodec` in the same row group? Is this too restrictive? Why can't we choose them to be uncompressed (like bloom filter) or compressed by a different scheme?

For other non-self-referenced cases, we can deduce compression codec based on `content_type` field, right? Shouldn't we do the same thing?

Reviewer 5: > For other non-self-referenced cases, we can deduce compression codec based on content_type field, right? Shouldn't we do the same thing?

The intent of the field is to capture the content type of the data for filters like "find all PNG images". I don't expect this to describe compression because that wouldn't be very useful (all `application/zip`, for example).

I think the `content_type` field would behave like the [HTTP `Content-Type` header](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Reference/Headers/Content-Type) that is the original media type before compression. HTTP uses a separate [`Content-Encoding` header](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Reference/Headers/Content-Encoding) for compression.

This leaves the question of how to determine the equivalent of `Content-Encoding` for external references. We should probably spend some time considering that more.

> The description here means that we enforce all inline blocks referenced by this FILE column to always use the same CompressionCodec in the same row group? Is this too restrictive? Why can't we choose them to be uncompressed (like bloom filter) or compressed by a different scheme?

Yes, I think that reading is accurate. Looks like this is a way to determine compression, but only for blobs that are located within the Parquet file itself as a self-reference.

I don't think that this is too restrictive since generic compression is typically uniform for files. I don't expect people to customize the compression used for these. We want compression to be possible (mandating uncompressed doesn't seem like a good choice), but we don't need to track it per value.

Reviewer 6: Thanks @rdblue for the clarification! Now I'm clear with the self-reference case. I agree that we need to think more about the equivalent of `Content-Encoding` for external references.

Author: After more discussion, I removed this requirement. Most multi-modal formats are already compressed and don't need further compression. If you want text to be compressed, you can use `inline`, self-referenced data can be just read without additional compression.

as the one specified for the `inline` column.

#### Validation

* A value must resolve to some referenced data. It resolves only if `inline`, `path`, or
  `offset` is set; if none of them are set, the value does not resolve and is invalid, even

>   if `size` is set. Use column nullability to represent a null value.

Reviewer 5: > Use column nullability to represent a null value

But empty string is considered unset?

* A self-reference (`path` not set) must set `offset`. A value with neither `path` nor
  `offset` set (and not `inline`) does not resolve and is invalid.
* `size` must be set whenever `offset` is set. A value that sets `offset` without `size`

>   is invalid. Because a self-reference must set `offset`, it must also set `size`.

Reviewer 5: How should implementations behave if `offset` is set but `size` is not? Are they required to fail?

Author: Ideally fail at write time, but is there a precedent for enforcing that? From your past comments it seems like we don't necessarily enforce contents of columns. Invalid files can be treated as `null` files in my opinion if we can't enforce it

Reviewer 5: A "must" requirement is sufficient for writers. I think that requirement implies a failure at write time because otherwise the requirements are violated.

I'm more concerned about read time, which is why I'm asking. If this is invalid, what is the expected reader behavior? In the `offset=null` case, `size` is understood to be the length of the file. That doesn't seem right, but my guess is that readers will produce bytes up to the end of the file unless you specifically state that this should fail.

Author: Writers should fail, my opinion is that readers should return `null` as the file reference other than outright failing, otherwise it makes it impossible to read the rest of the data that may be valid in the file.

* If `inline` is set, it supplies the bytes; producers may instead treat `inline` and the

>   locator fields as mutually exclusive.

Reviewer 5: Readers may not because locator fields may be persisted to record provenance?

* Field names within a `FILE`-annotated group must not be renamed.
* Additional metadata about the file (e.g., modification timestamp) must
  be stored adjacent to this group by engines or table formats, not inside it.

> Statistics may be collected for the individual fields of a `FILE`-annotated group

Reviewer 6: Which kind of type family does `FILE` belong to: primitive, complex, or something else?

Author: It should be treated like a struct. So the statistics can be tracked for the fields inside it as leaf columns

> according to the sort order of each field's logical type.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
according to the sort order of each field.
```

Or physical and logical type?

Author: it's just referring to the sort order defined in the logical type definition for each field. Tried to make this clearer

This is an example of a `FILE`-annotated group that defines all fields:

```
optional group my_file (FILE) {
  optional binary path (STRING);
  optional int64 offset;
  optional int64 size;
  optional binary content_type (STRING);
  optional binary checksum (STRING);
  optional binary inline;
}
```

Because every field is optional, a group need only define the fields it uses. A group

> whose values are always stored inline may define just `inline`:

Reviewer 6: Why defined `content_type` below but here says `just inline`? Seems inconsistent.

Reviewer 6: I don't see this is addressed. At least `inline_file` struct below still defines `content_type`.

Author: I added ```and optionally `content_type` as additional metadata:```

| -        | set   | set      | -      | invalid                                               |
| -        | set   | -        | set    | external `uri`, `[0, size)`                           |
| -        | set   | set      | set    | external `uri`, `[offset, offset + size)`             |
| -        | -     | set      | -      | invalid                                               |
| -        | -     | -        | set    | invalid                                               |
| -        | -     | set      | set    | this file, `[offset, offset + size)` (self-reference) |
| -        | -     | -        | -      | nothing - invalid                                     |

`size` must be set whenever `offset` is set, so any offset-based read always carries an
explicit `size`. A self-reference (`uri` not set) must set `offset`, and therefore also
`size`. `size` may be omitted only for a whole-file external reference, where the range
runs to the end of the referenced file.

A self-reference points within the same Parquet file using `offset` and `size` (both
required). A self-reference is when `uri` is not set. A file containing self-references

> can be renamed or relocated as a single unit.
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
can be renamed or relocated as a single unit.

Parquet files containing self-references must not use Parquet modular encryption.
Self-referenced byte ranges are not Parquet encryption modules and therefore cannot
be encrypted or authenticated independently. Encryption of external files referenced
by `uri` is outside the scope of the Parquet format.

```

external reference (`path` set). `offset` must not be < 0.

##### size

The byte length of the referenced data. Must be zero or a positive integer if set; a
value of 0 indicates empty referenced data. `size` must be set whenever `offset` is set.
It may be omitted only for a whole-file external reference (`path` set, `offset` not set),
in which case the range runs to the end of the referenced file. Because a self-reference
always sets `offset`, it always sets `size` as well.

##### content_type

The media type (MIME type), as defined by RFC 2046, of the resolved bytes (e.g., `image/png`).
When not set, the type can be assumed as `application/octet-stream`.

##### checksum

A self-describing integrity token for the resolved bytes, of the form
`<algorithm>:<digest>`, where `<digest>` is encoded according to the `Encoding`
column below. Readers should ignore unknown algorithms. The recognized algorithms
are:

| Algorithm | Encoding      | Notes                                                    |
|-----------|---------------|----------------------------------------------------------|
| `ETAG`    | opaque        | the object-store eTag, not recomputable                  |

> | `MD5`     | lowercase hex | as defined in RFC 6151 represented as 32 hex characters  |

Reviewer 3: I would propose we reference [RFC 1321](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc1321) (The MD5 Message-Digest Algorithm) over [RFC 6151](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6151) (Updated Security Considerations for the MD5 Message-Digest and the HMAC-MD5 Algorithms).

```suggestion
| `MD5`     | lowercase hex | as defined in RFC 1321 represented as 32 hex characters  |
```

Author: done!

| `CRC32`   | lowercase hex | as defined in RFC 3385, represented as 8 hex characters  |

> | `CRC32C`  | lowercase hex | as defined in RFC 9260, represented as 8 hex characters  |

Reviewer 3: These might fit better - I am in no way an expert on CRC32(c) [RFC 2083](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2083#page-15), [RFC 3385](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3385#section-5.1), but we would want to specify exact alghoritms used.
```suggestion
| `CRC32`   | lowercase hex | as defined in RFC 2083, represented as 8 hex characters  |
| `CRC32C`  | lowercase hex | as defined in RFC 3385, represented as 8 hex characters  |
```

Author: done, thank you!

bytes and any locator fields (`path`, `offset`, `size`) that are set are provenance
only.

#### Resolution

A value resolves to bytes based on which of `inline`, `path`, `offset`, and `size` are
set:

| `inline` | `path` | `offset` | `size` | Resolves to                                           |
|----------|--------|----------|--------|-------------------------------------------------------|
| set      | –      | –        | –      | the inline bytes                                      |
| –        | set    | –        | –      | whole external file at `path`                         |
| –        | set    | set      | -      | invalid                                               |
| –        | set    | –        | set    | external `path`, `[0, size)`                          |
| –        | set    | set      | set    | external `path`, `[offset, offset + size)`            |
| –        | -      | set      | -      | invalid                                               |
| –        | -      | -        | set    | invalid                                               |
| –        | –      | set      | set    | this file, `[offset, offset + size)` (self-reference) |

> | –        | –      | –        | –      | nothing — invalid                                     |

Reviewer 3: nit: this table uses both dash (-) and em dash (–) to indicate null input. Let's just use dash?.

Author: fixed

`size` must be set whenever `offset` is set, so any offset-based read always carries an
explicit `size`. A self-reference (`path` not set) must set `offset`, and therefore also
`size`. `size` may be omitted only for a whole-file external reference, where the range
runs to the end of the referenced file.

A self-reference points within the same Parquet file using `offset` and `size` (both
required). A self-reference is when `path` is not set. A file containing self-references
can be renamed or relocated as a single unit.

The bytes referenced by a self-reference use the `CompressionCodec`
defined by the `inline` column chunk's `ColumnMetadata`.

#### Validation

* A value must resolve to some referenced data. It resolves only if `inline`, `path`, or
  `offset` is set; if none of them are set, the value does not resolve and is invalid, even
  if `size` is set.
* A self-reference (`path` not set) must set `offset`. A value with neither `path` nor
  `offset` set (and not `inline`) does not resolve and is invalid.
* `size` must be set whenever `offset` is set. A value that sets `offset` without `size`
  is invalid. Because a self-reference must set `offset`, it must also set `size`.

> * If `inline` is set, it supplies the bytes readers; producers may treat `inline` and the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* If `inline` is set, it supplies the bytes; producers may treat `inline` and the
```

Author: added `for readers`. There was a comment before around reader confusion

The sort order used for `GEOGRAPHY` is undefined. When writing data, no min/max
statistics should be saved for this type and if such non-compliant statistics
are found during reading, they must be ignored.

### FILE

`FILE` annotates a group that represents a reference to an external file, along with
the minimum metadata required to read it. It is intended for use cases such as
storing file inventories, manifests, and unstructured data references (e.g., images
or audio files stored in object storage).

The annotated group must contain the following fields, identified by name. Field IDs
may also be used for projection:

| Field    | Type   | Required |
|----------|--------|----------|
| `path`   | STRING | Yes      |
| `size`   | INT64  | No       |
| `offset` | INT64  | No       |
| `etag`   | STRING | No       |

#### path

An opaque path string to the referenced file (e.g., `s3://bucket/file.jpg`). No special
encoding (e.g., URI encoding) is applied. This is the only required field.

#### size

The length of the content in bytes. Must be zero or a positive integer if provided.

> A value of 0 indicates an empty file.

Reviewer 4: maybe be explicit about semantics if not provided.

#### offset

> A byte offset for range reads. If not provided, readers must treat the value as 0.

Reviewer 9: This isn't actually "for range reads".  It's to indicate that the content referenced content is a slice of the referenced file.  The term "range read" implies that it's still the full file but the act of reading it just uses a particular range.  I find the terminology a little strange.

> If provided and non-zero, readers must seek to this offset and read `size` bytes.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If provided and non-zero, readers must seek to this offset and read `size` bytes to retrieve the referenced data.
```

If `offset` is provided, `size` must also be provided.

#### etag

An eTag value provided by the storage system (e.g., from S3 or Azure Blob Storage).
Can be used to detect whether the referenced file has been updated. If the reference
points to a byte range within a file, the eTag applies to the entire file.

> Validation rules for readers and writers:

Reviewer 9: Do we need a separate heading here?  Seems like this should all be under `####Validation` not `etag`

The sort order used for `GEOGRAPHY` is undefined. When writing data, no min/max
statistics should be saved for this type and if such non-compliant statistics
are found during reading, they must be ignored.

### FILE

`FILE` annotates a group that represents a reference to an external file, along with
the minimum metadata required to read it. It is intended for use cases such as
storing file inventories, manifests, and unstructured data references (e.g., images
or audio files stored in object storage).

> The annotated group must contain the following fields, identified by name. Field IDs

Reviewer 5: I think that using "identified by name" conflicts with the next sentence. I would remove both. You don't need to state how these are identified.

If you want to be more clear, then you could add requirements like not renaming the fields. You could also say that the fields can be reordered, which would also remove the ability to project by order (which would be weird anyway).

> may also be used for projection:

Reviewer: After looking at the reference implementation I find this wording a bit confusing. The group "must" contain these fields, except it really only "must" contain `path`, and "may" contain the other three. I thought the `Required` column in the following table only referred to whether the field repetition was 'required' or 'optional'.

Reviewer 5: I think it should be that the struct "must contain the following fields". That avoids the confusing meaning of "required".

> may also be used for projection:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The annotated group must contain the following fields, identified by name (not by order).
Field IDs (if exist) may also be used for projection:
```

> | Field    | Type   | Required |

Reviewer 5: I think it would be better to use `repetition` instead of `required`, and either `required` or `optional` in the table.

I would also state that the struct must contain exactly these fields, rather than saying they are all required since "required" has a special meaning here (the Parquet type's repetition).

|----------|--------|----------|
| `path`   | STRING | Yes      |
| `size`   | INT64  | No       |
| `offset` | INT64  | No       |

> | `etag`   | STRING | No       |

Reviewer 10: I'm neutral on whether the Parquet spec should stay minimal or include convenient metadata (content type, metadata map etc.) for common use cases

But if we are leaning toward keeping the spec simple, I don't think `etag` should be part of the spec either. `etag` feels more like storage specific metadata than a portable field with consistent semantics across storage systems

Would be happy to hear more thoughts on this!

Reviewer 8: I actually brought this up today in the Parquet sync, it's the odd one out of this pack of properties.

Reviewer 2: I concur. The type should be minimal. Also we should make all fields optional and define the semantics of them missing:
- `path`: the file path if present, otherwise this is the path of the current file
- `offset`: the start of the binary data, otherwise 0
- `size`: the size of the binary data, otherwise the length of the file. `size`, given or derived, is capped such that `offset + size <= file_size`

> 

Reviewer 11: I really think we should include `content_type` as field here. I fully understand that we don't want to have all kinds of optional metadata like `last_modified` as part of the spec, as this optional metadata is only needed for a smaller subset of queries and differs between different engines. However, the `content_type` is required information for a large fraction of common AI/ML workloads, and there is a good reason why existing FILE datatypes in engines like BigQuery or Snowflake have it as part of the datatype.

Many existing AI and ML-related functions on FILEs only work for certain modalities. E.g., an `AI_TRANSCRIBE` function only makes sense for audio and video data. Many common ML preprocessing techniques/functions only work for certain modalities, e.g., downscaling the resolution of images, turning image colours into grey scale, cropping and rotating pictures, downsampling the fps of a video etc. Some AI models only support text data, while others also support modalities like images. Routing AI function calls to compatible models critically depends on modalities, conceptually. If this isn't part of the datatype, a large fraction of FILE usecases would have to repeatedly read the first n bytes of a file to try to infer the modality, resulting in a big, unnecessary performance overhead that could be easily avoided. 

The main reason to add a FILE datatype to the spec is to better support new Gen AI workloads with unstructured data. I think not having a `content_type` field would critically impact the user experience for the intended main usecase of FILE. 

Can we please reconsider adding `content_type`?

Reviewer 11: One argument from the Parquet sync last week against this concern was that most engines anyway just infer content_type based on the file extension. However, this spec PR includes an `offset` field and says a reader should "seek to this offset and read size bytes to retrieve the referenced data" within the referenced file. But this means that a single physical container file can pack byte ranges for multiple logical files, and path then points to the container, not the logical entry.

In that case the extension of path tells you nothing about the modality of a given slice. The container can hold images, audio, and documents at different offsets. Extension-based inference only works when one path = one homogeneous file, which offset/size explicitly break. That leaves either byte-sniffing each slice at query time, or carrying the type in side metadata.

The second option seems to be something we want to avoid: a reader can read the FILE struct but still can't tell how to interpret the bytes at offset/size without additional knowledge, which breaks the "if you can read the type, you can understand everything in the type" goal.

So it seems to me that offset/size make content_type necessary, at least whenever offset is non-zero, for the type to stay self-describing. Is there something I'm missing that keeps the bytes interpretable without it? Or is the officially recommended path to always do byte sniffing at query runtime?

Reviewer 11: A bit of background information for people not very familiar with semantic query processing and unstructured data yet:

When thinking about real-world use of unstructured data, there are many domains where mixing different modalities within one table column is quite natural.

E.g., once you look at the law domain, you might have court cases with different kinds of evidence: videos, images, pdf scans of police reports, etc. Other columns in the table might then be columns like "case_id", "case_name", "judge_id", "file_source", ... Other domain examples would be patient records in healthcare that mix medical imaging, pdf scans of written medical reports, prescriptions, etc. Or think about the kind of unstructured data a reporter might be working with.

DB users couldn't really do large-scale automated analysis of unstructured data before the rise of LLMs, and are now discovering step-by-step what is possible. Being able to efficiently answer basic questions like what kind of unstructured data you are dealing with sounds like a natural requirement to me to support currently emerging workloads.

Reviewer 8: I think there's a strong case to include content_type here, but with well defined limits so it doesn't turn into a general optional-metadata bucket.

Concretely:

- content_type is a media type per [RFC 6838](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6838) and should be an IANA-registered type (https://www.iana.org/assignments/media-types/media-types.xhtml). I'd lean toward constraining it further, but I don't think we can do that cleanly, and I'm not sure forbidding things like multipart actually buys anyone anything.
- It is matched case-insensitively, readers should compare on the type/subtype.
- If the field is missing, or a reader sees a value it can't parse or doesn't recognize, it is treated as application/octet-stream. That keeps readers from having to fail on a bad value, and it means "missing" and "octet-stream" get the same handling. Whatever an engine does for octet-stream is what it should do when the field is absent.

The point of the constraint is that every engine, reader, or utility handed a FILE gets a known, bounded set of behaviors it can expect from the string, with a defined default. This is basically what the cloud storage providers do today, and what HTTP does with a missing Content-Type, so we're matching the most common existing behavior rather than inventing new semantics.

To be clear on scope, this is not an argument for arbitrary optional metadata.

This solves the self-describing type in the offset/size case Stefan raised, where path alone can't tell you the modality of a packed slice.

cc @rdblue (who was chatting with me about this earlier today)

Reviewer 5: +1 for Russell's argument here. I think it is valuable to be able to filter on type and if we are compacting multiple blobs into a container file we wouldn't be able to rely on extension alone. As long as we have guidelines for behavior so that this is useful across engines, I'm good including this.

Author: Added content_type and checksum

#### Fields

##### path

> An opaque path string to the referenced file (e.g., `s3://bucket/file.jpg`). No special

Reviewer 6: If this is opaque, should we remove `No special encoding (e.g., URI encoding) is applied`? It seems valid if users want to apply URI encoding.

Reviewer 12: I think this is saying that implementations must not apply encoding on top of what the user provides. We should clarify the wording

> encoding (e.g., URI encoding) is applied. This is the only required field.

Reviewer 13: The example shows a URI but this mandates no URI encoding??

Author: no additional URI encoding on top of it. Essentially, what the client provides, it gets stored - there's no additional manipulation of the input

##### size

The length of the content in bytes. Must be zero or a positive integer if provided.

> A value of 0 indicates an empty file. If not provided, the length of the referenced

Reviewer 6: Do we want to advise the reader to ignore negative value here?

Reviewer 12: IMO we should specify that readers error on invalid values, not silently ignore

Reviewer 5: We can't require readers to fail, we can only say what it means when the length is -1. Failure is a responsibility of whatever uses this data, and it's even hard to require that component to fail because users don't want their query to fail for one bad row. They expect reasonable fallback behavior.

Also, does 0 indicate an empty file or does it indicate 0-length content? With `offset`, I think this indicates that the content length is 0, not that the underlying file is empty.

content is unknown and the entirety of the content can be read.

> ##### offset

Reviewer 12: Should we specify that it must be non-negative?

A byte offset indicating the start of a content slice within the referenced file.
If not provided, readers must treat the value as 0.
If provided and non-zero, readers must seek to this offset and read `size` bytes to retrieve the referenced data.

> If `offset` is provided, `size` must also be provided.

Reviewer: Again, looking at the implementation in Rust, I don't see this enforced. What if the group definition is
```
optional group my_file (FILE) {
  required binary path (STRING);
  optional int64 offset;
}
```
I think we need to specify this at both the field and data levels, i.e. if the group contains an 'offset' field, it must also contain a 'size' field; if the optional 'offset' field is populated, it must be a non-negative integer, and a value for 'size' must also present.

Edit: I think the `MAP` description in this file is a good example of what I'm wanting here:

> - The key field encodes the map's key type. This field must have repetition required and must always be present. It must always be the first field of the repeated key_value group.
> - The value field encodes the map's value type and repetition. This field can be required, optional, or omitted. It must always be the second field of the repeated key_value group if present. If not present, it can be represented as a map with all null values or as a set of keys.

##### etag

An eTag value provided by the storage system (e.g., from S3 or Azure Blob Storage).
Can be used to detect whether the referenced file has been updated. If the reference

> points to a byte range within a file, the eTag applies to the entire file.

Reviewer 5: What should writers do when there is no etag provided by the system, like in a local FS? What about systems that have checksums but don't call them etags?

#### Validation

* The `path` field is required and must be present. Readers must reject a `FILE`-annotated

>   group that does not contain `path`.

Reviewer 5: So this makes a file completely unreadable? 🤔

Reviewer 2: As I posted in another comment we should make `path` optional and if it is missing it means the reference is to the same file. This has two advantages:
1. make already supported self-reference (path == "current-file") moveable. On a file rename the self-reference is still valid. Ergo a file with only self-references is trivially moveable.
2. it removes a non-representable state from the type system: non-existent `path` is not an error anymore, no need to check it

* If `offset` is present and non-zero, `size` must also be provided.

> * Additional metadata about the file (e.g., content type, modification timestamp) should

Reviewer 6: Why adding this restriction? Do we want to enforce Parquet reader implementations to validate against this rule? I can foresee that users may use another group type (a.k.a struct) to wrap a `FILE` type and a `VARIANT` type for extra metadata.

Reviewer 12: I think we should just specify that extra fields must not be added to this struct. @wgtmac wdyt of just saying:

> Additional metadata about the file (e.g. content type, modification timestamp) must not be stored inside this struct.

Reviewer 14: How are we thinking about various engines adding very common fields like content type, modification timestamp? If they are not part of the parquet file format, I suspect there will be lot of non-interoperable implementations with those fields. Do we expect this file type to evolve to support those in the future?
  
e.g. these two definitions won't be interoperable because they wrap the FILE struct differently. It would be  easier/less error-prone if data type allowed extra fields or a variant to capture additional attributes so that engines don't need a wrapper on top of the file object.
  
```
  FileEngine1 (outer struct) {
  file_ref FILE
  content_type STRING
  last_modified TIMESTAMP
  }
  
  FileEngine2 (outer struct) {
  fileRef FILE
  mimeType STRING
  lastModified TIMESTAMP
  }
```

Reviewer 11: I also think that without optional metadata we risk non-interoperable implementations of those fields. 

These additional fields are directly linked to the files and even specific versions of a file (see the `etag` field). If additional fields like `content_type` and `last_modified` are stored separately, they can get out of sync. If a file gets updated but related fields like `last_modified` are not updated in sync, it will lead to wrong results to any reader that relies on `last_modified` being in sync with the file version. If we had these additional fields as part of the file datatype itself, it would solve such problems by design: every engine can rely on such fields being up-to-date if they are present, and leave out fields it doesn't understand when writing file columns.

  be stored adjacent to this struct by engines or table formats, not inside it.

Statistics may be collected for the individual fields of a `FILE`-annotated group
according to the sort order of each field's logical type.

This is an example `FILE`-annotated group in Parquet:

```
optional group my_file (FILE) {
  required binary path (STRING);
  optional int64 size;
  optional int64 offset;
  optional binary etag (STRING);
}
```

> *Compatibility*

Reviewer 5: I wouldn't include this. Seems unnecessary to me.
